# minijava-compiler
A robust descendant LL(1) compiler built from scratch using Kotlin. This project targets MiniJava, a subset of the Java programming language, and performs the full compilation pipeline—from raw source code to executable bytecode.

## Overview
The compiler is structured into four main phases, ensuring rigorous validation and efficient code transformation:
* **Lexical Analysis**: Tokenizes the source code, handling identifiers, keywords, and operators.
* **Syntactical Analysis**: Validates the program structure against the MiniJava grammar.
* **Semantic Analysis**: Enforces type safety, scope rules, and class hierarchy integrity (including inheritance checks).
* **Code Generation**: Produces optimized bytecode compatible with the CeIVM.

Unlike most common top-down LL(1) parsers, this compiler runs iteratively (non-recursively), following a more bottom-up approach, for better performance on big source files.

## Prerequisites
* **Java**: 21 or higher
* **Kotlin**: 2.2.2 or higher
* **IDE**: Intellij IDEA

## Building and running
To build the project from source:
1. Clone this repository and open the project in IntelliJ IDEA.
2. Go to ```File>Project Structure...```.
3. Under Project Settings, go to Artifacts.
4. Add a new JAR artifact from the option "From module with dependencies".
5. Select MainKt as main class and apply changes.
6. Go to ```Build>Build Artifacts...``` and select the JAR configuration just created. A JAR file will be created under ```/out/artifacts``` folder.

To run, open a terminal under the root folder of the project and run:<br>
```java -jar ./out/artifacts/minijava_compiler_jar/minijava-compiler.jar <filename>```<br>
Where <filename> is a minijava file that exists in the root directory.

Upon execution, a bytecode file will be generated under the same folder as the JAR file, for what moving it to the root directory is recommended. This file can be passed as an argument to CeIVM, a virtual machine that can run the bytecode generated by the compiler.
The CeIVM jar file is located under the root directory.

## MiniJava Overview
The compiler supports a wide range of OOP and procedural features:
* Classes and Inheritance: Support for single inheritance and method overriding.
* Types: Primitive types (int, boolean, char) and Object references.
* Control Flow: if-else statements and while loops.
* Input/Output: Built-in support for standard output.

---
## License
This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.